+++
title = "Miki Sayaka Devblog 002: Two Months Later"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["coding", "discord", "automation", "miki sayaka"]
+++

[Four months
ago](https://github.com/j1nxie/mikisayaka/commit/c76ffc62a67e2724cf25182f97e0eea0cf3870ca),
I started working on Sayaka, with some simple features to kick it off with. I
originally planned to write a weekly-ish devblog, with the first entry being
[two months ago](sayaka-dev-01), but... being a combination of my laziness with
how fast Sayaka was moving at that point, it was a rather impossible feat for me
to do.

So, two months later from that last post, where are we? I'm happy to say Sayaka
has managed to bump **one** whole major version (!!!) and we've improved quite a
lot from where we started.

## Pagination

To start off with, Sayaka has proper pagination now. As of the time of writing,
she's currently tracking about 115 manga titles. Using `s>manga list` now gives
you a neat little embed like so, with buttons to change pages.

![The message output for Sayaka's manga list](/image/sayaka-dev-02/embed.png)

This... unfortunately isn't available (yet) in the self-roles commands...
because I'm lazy... I'll get around to it sometimes, I swear. It doesn't see a
whole lot of uses because Nazunacord itself doesn't see much activity and we're
all admins, but I *cannot check
[this](https://github.com/j1nxie/mikisayaka/issues/4) off as finished until I do
it...*

## Link parser

Sayaka also got a neat feature, matching any MangaDex link posted to the Discord
channel to read data for!

![The message output for Sayaka's MD link
parser](/image/sayaka-dev-02/parser.png)

I originally let MangaDex's original embed sorta coexist with Sayaka's: MangaDex
would have the description, the cover art, while Sayaka would have all the
information. But, after a while it cluttered up pretty quickly. So... it took me
like... two hours... to figure out how to remove another user's embed from the
bot's side. I merged up the cover thumbnail, as well as the description, and
there we have it!

## Chapter tracker

While I was at it, I also figured out how to neatly create a chapter tracker /
notifier as originally planned too!

![Notification messages sent by
Sayaka](/image/sayaka-dev-02/chapter-tracker.png)

Originally, I implemented this by using a webhook, as I couldn't figure out
*how* to send a message through the bot client created by poise. Afterwards, I
spent a lot of time trying to figure out, even thinking of using a MPSC channel
to fire things from the tracker task to the bot client.

After a good while figuring out the internals of the types used in poise and
serenity, I realized... it's all `Arc<T>` under the hood... The solution then? I
[cloned the `Arc<Http>` instance from the
bot](https://github.com/j1nxie/mikisayaka/commit/5b79da615c6581fd487bc768c68edcb66ba7a28d)
and just used it to send messages, as I already know the Discord channel I'll be
sending notifications into in the first place. This ends up making me really
appreciate Rust and the `Arc<T>` type. Nothing beats being able to just do:

```rust
let http = client.http.clone();

let bot_handle = tokio::spawn(async move { client.start().await.unwrap() });

if data_clone.md.is_some() && webhook_url.is_ok() {
    tracing::info!("initialized chapter tracker!");

    tokio::spawn(
        async move {
            let interval = tokio::time::interval(std::time::Duration::from_secs(7200));
            let task = futures::stream::unfold(interval, |mut interval| async {
                interval.tick().await;
                let _ = chapter_tracker::chapter_tracker(&http, &data_clone).await;

                Some(((), interval))
            });

            task.for_each(|_| async {}).await;
        }
        .in_current_span(),
    );
}
```

and it *just fucking works*. I don't even have to worry about it being
thread-unsafe as it's all *atomically reference-counted*, and cloning is free.
It's amazing!

## さようなら, slash commands!

I've also decided to [pull the plug on slash
commands](https://github.com/j1nxie/mikisayaka/commit/50c0875c30c7d11127866e9faa40da893ce8ffc7).
Why? I personally don't use it, and no one really does in the server it's made
for anyways. I feel like it would end up being a pain in the ass to maintain if
I ever added some funky features that required a lot of arguments parsing, as my
friend beerpsi had suffered writing extra features for his own bot...

> Time for a rant on slash commands and the general state of the Discord API.
> The more I write Discord bots, the more I seem to dislike it, or at least, how
> often it's slightly changing.

Now that I'm no longer one to be impressed by the shiny, latest&trade;
technologies, <span style="font-size: 12px;">(and this is probably a lukewarm
take at this point)</span> I've come to realize Discord slash commands are one
of the worst things to ever be created by mankind.

Personally, I very much dislike slash commands, as it's lumping *all* available
bot commands under the same namespace and... tell me how you're quickly using a
commmand at a glance if there are five hundred bots using the same `/status`?

The API changes very often in very subtle ways, especially surrounding the whole
permissions / privileges thing. Maybe I'm not the one looking out for Discord
API changes, but I *swear* that these are **not** clearly stated anywhere when
they actually do change it.

Everything feels very inconsistent, from the way the APIs are designed to handle
slash commands vs. prefix commands, and how to **respond** to those as well, it
feels horrible and unwieldy to write code for, and that is reflected down to the
libraries.

Yes, you can argue that prefix commands are being phased out by Discord and
that's why they feel horrible to use, but honestly writing a slash-first bot
isn't much easier either - they categorize a lot of stuff in very weird ways
that would wind you in reading **a lot** of badly-documented documentations. Not
the best of impressions, after I spent more than 24 hours attempting to write
something that leveraged those features.

## Future?

I'm not too sure what's going to be next for Sayaka. Feature-wise, she's
generally complete, and I'm not too keen on expanding her *far too much* beyond
her original scope.

A neat thing could be that `s>manga sync` also manually triggering the chapter
tracker - but I have yet to figure out a method to lock the entire tracking
process to only run once at any given time.

Of course... there's implementing pagination for the roles list too... I'll get
to it I promise... It should just be the same code but changing the content
strings... I think.

I think I would also spend some time doing configuration stuff, right now the
chapter tracker is straight up hardcoded to be two hours, and sometimes I want
to lower it, but I keep forgetting to do so as well.

Finally, thanks for reading to the end. Source code for Sayaka is always
available on my [GitHub](https://github.com/j1nxie/mikisayaka)!
