---
title: "Advent of Code 2022, Day 01 in Rust"
date: 2022-12-01 17:00:00 +0700
layout: post
categories: [blogs, english]
tags: ["advent of code", coding]
---

It's that time of the year again! December has started, and once again, another
[Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com) starts! For this year, I'll attempt
to solve the puzzles on the days they are released, with solutions written
mainly in Rust. For some puzzles, I shall try to up the ante by writing a
solution in Game Boy-flavored C.

## Setting up my setup environment

I will be generating my code repository using
[fspoettel](https://github.com/fspoettel)'s
[advent-of-code-rust](https://github.com/fspoettel/advent-of-code-rust). This is
a very neat repository template that has all the features you will need for
Advent of Code: day scaffolding, built-in unit tests, input downloading, etc.
It is very easy to setup and helps you with organizing your AoC codebase.

After generating my repository from the template, my personal preferences are to
enable Clippy and the automated `README.md` progress tracker. Then, I will clone
the repository, and `cargo scaffold 01` to prepare the files for the first day.
With all that set up, time to proceed with the actual solving!

## Solving the first part

I will be quoting each day's question statement, minus the flavor text. The
first part is given as below:

> The jungle must be too overgrown and difficult to navigate in vehicles or
> access from the air; the Elves' expedition traditionally goes on foot. As your
> boats approach land, the Elves begin taking inventory of their supplies. One
> important consideration is food - in particular, the number of **Calories** each
> Elf is carrying (your puzzle input).
>
> The Elves take turns writing down the number of Calories contained by the
> various meals, snacks, rations, etc. that they've brought with them, one item
> per line. Each Elf separates their own inventory from the previous Elf's
> inventory (if any) by a blank line.
>
> For example, suppose the Elves finish writing their items' Calories and end up
> with the following list:
> ```
> 1000
> 2000
> 3000
>
> 4000
>
> 5000
> 6000
>
> 7000
> 8000
> 9000
>
> 10000
> ```
> This list represents the Calories of the food carried by five Elves:
>
> The first Elf is carrying food with `1000`, `2000`, and `3000` Calories, a
> total of `6000` Calories.
>
> The second Elf is carrying one food item with `4000` Calories.
>
> The third Elf is carrying food with `5000` and `6000` Calories, a total of
> `11000` Calories.
>
> The fourth Elf is carrying food with `7000`, `8000`, and `9000` Calories, a
> total of `24000` Calories.
>
> The fifth Elf is carrying one food item with `10000` Calories.
>
> In case the Elves get hungry and need extra snacks, they need to know which
> Elf to ask: they'd like to know how many Calories are being carried by the Elf
> carrying the most Calories. In the example above, this is `24000` (carried by
> the fourth Elf). Find the Elf carrying the most Calories. **How many total
> Calories is that Elf carrying?**

This question is a rather simple one. As each chunk, seperated by an empty line,
represents a single Elf, I will split the input text into each chunk, and push
each chunk into a `Vec`. An empty `Vec` will also be created to hold the Calories
count of each Elf (this will be empty because we will take care of this part
later!)

```rust
let elves: Vec<&str> = input.split("\n\n").collect();
let mut foods: Vec<u32> = vec![];
```

Afterwards, I will iterate through each Elf inside the `elves` vector, parse
each of the `&str` line to obtain its value, and sum all those values up to get
the total Calories count of an Elf. I will then push this value into the `foods`
vector created above.

```rust
for elf in elves {
	let food: u32 = elf.lines().map(|x| x.parse::<u32>().unwrap()).sum();
	foods.push(food);
}
```

After dealing with this, it's just a matter of using a few Rust methods, namely
`.into_iter()` and `.max()` to obtain the maximum amount of Calories carried.

```rust
Some(foods.into_iter().max().unwrap() as u32)
```

The `Some` and the `u32` cast was used here as the return type of the functions
as scaffolded by `advent-of-code-rust` is `Option<u32>` by default.

I will be editing the test case result in the `test_part_one()` function into
`24000` as given in the question statement as well.

```rust
#[test]
fn test_part_one() {
	let input = advent_of_code::read_file("examples", 1);
	assert_eq!(part_one(input), Some(24000));
}
```

## Solving the second part

The second part's question statement is given as such:

> By the time you calculate the answer to the Elves' question, they've already
> realized that the Elf carrying the most Calories of food might eventually
> **run out of snacks**.
>
> To avoid this unacceptable situation, the Elves would instead like to know the
> total Calories carried by the **top three** Elves carrying the most Calories.
> That way, even if one of those Elves runs out of snacks, they still have two
> backups.
>
> In the example above, the top three Elves are the fourth Elf (with `24000`
> Calories), then the third Elf (with `11000` Calories), then the fifth Elf (with
> `10000` Calories). The sum of the Calories carried by these three elves is
> `45000`.
>
> Find the top three Elves carrying the most Calories. **How many Calories are
> those Elves carrying in total?**

We will be going through the same steps as the previous part: Splitting text
input into chunks, pushing them into a vector, calculating the total Calories
count for each Elf.

```rust
let elves: Vec<&str> = input.split("\n\n").collect();
let mut foods: Vec<u32> = vec![];
for elf in elves {
	let food: u32 = elf.lines().map(|x| x.parse::<u32>().unwrap()).sum();
	foods.push(food);
}
```

For the next step, I'll be using Rust's built-in `.sort_by()` method to sort the
`foods` vector in descending order.

```rust
foods.sort_by(|a, b| b.cmp(a));
```

After that, it's just a matter of grabbing the sum of the first 3 elements of
the above vector.

```rust
Some(foods[0] + foods[1] + foods[2])
```

Similar to the previous part's test case, I'll be editing its result to `45000`
as given by the question statement.

```rust
#[test]
fn test_part_two() {
	let input = advent_of_code::read_file("examples", 2);
	assert_eq!(part_two(&input), Some(45000));
}
```

## Afterword

As typical for all day 1 questions of each year, this is a rather simple and
straightforward question that can basically be solved using some parsing. The
harder part of this is to write clean and Rust-y code I guess? I feel like I can
definitely make the `for` loops more Rust-y by using iterator methods more, but
I still haven't figured it out yet!

My code can be found on my
[GitHub](https://github.com/j1nxie/aoc-rs-2022/blob/main/src/bin/01.rs). Feel
free to check it out!
