---
title: "Lumine Rambles: Aikatsu Episode 01"
categories: [thoughts, english]
tags: [anime]
---

Heyo! I have returned for more anime rambling! This time, I ran out of anime to
watch, and I've decided to pick up
[Aikatsu!](https://myanimelist.net/anime/15061/Aikatsu) for a watch. And thus,
Lumine Rambles was born. This will be less focused on reviewing the anime
itself, but more like my thoughts when I was watching each episode. These
thoughts may or may not contain spoilers for each episode, so please be careful
when you're reading these if you want to avoid spoilers!

My first thought upon seeing Ichigo was, "damn, she *really* is the typical
anime protagonist - cheerful, always happy and optimistic, but a bit of an
airhead." And my idea gets proven immediately when she accidentally damages her
brother Raichi's merch of the Top Idol, Kanzaki Mizuki. And that's where Kiriya
Aoi, her best friend, number one supporter, gay girlfriend, etc. comes to the
rescue! Out of nowhere, she infused a **whole collection of merchandise** that
she is just going to give to Raichi like that. Like, what the heck, that just
shows how much stuff she got herself, imagine if they had shown her entire
collection...

If there is something I've noticed, Ichigo's mom looks a lot like Makima from
Chainsaw Man, and Aoi is just Suisei if she was in a 2010s' anime. Really,
Ichigo's mom even has the similarity down to the hairstyle and the hazel-ish
eye color. Aoi also sports the tied-up blue hair like Suisei too! Or maybe,
reality is that I'm just seeing more things than there are.

The section where Aoi explains her connections so that they could get the
tickets for the Mizuki performance is just so funny and relatable if you know
the Vietnamese family situation. And I quote:

> Then I found out my Dad's cousin's daughter's second cousin's classmate that
> he hadn't met in several years has a son whose little league team's manager's
> mother's brother met a Frenchman at a travel agency while on vacation who just
> happened to be looked after by a nice old Japanese woman while he was in
> Japan, and *she*'s friends with someone in the broadcasting company.

The length that this girl goes to get tickets to her favorite idol's
performance.

Fast-forwarding to Mizuki's performance, honestly, Love Live!'s 3D models were
definitely a huuuuge step up from this. Really, whose idea was it to model them
with those weird noodly limbs??? I'm so confused and it looks really eerie
sometimes. But seriously, holy shit, I wasn't expecting her vocals to be
SOOOOOOOOOOO GOOD??? No wonder she's the in-universe Top Idol, goddamn her
vocals were so good, I was really hooked onto her performance too!

Back home, Ichigo realizes she's now hooked to idols, and is found watching the
recording of the performance. She grows fond of idols so quickly I can't-- After
a period of deciding whether to pursure idol school, she gets convinced by her
mother to go for the Starlight Academy audition. Her mom is soooooo supportive
😭 She's truly blessed by her mom.

After a ton of training along with Aoi, they finally participate in the audition
together, and somehow Ichigo manages to pop the Special Appeal power spike right
off the start??? Her plot armor thickens. Upon receiving the results to their
auditions, Ichigo and Aoi starts their idol school life together!
*(lesbians...)* Seriously, the more you look at them, the more you think they're
two dumb lesbians super into eachother.

Really though, for an idol's anime of the 2010s - Aikatsu! has a lot of
potential. I have yet to watch the later episodes, but once I do, more thoughts
will be written here! I really enjoyed the two vocal performances in the first
episode, and that's quite a lot for me upon starting a new idol show ^^
